---
layout: post
title:  "How I started HRT"
date:   2018-08-26 00:00:00 -0600
categories: transgender trans journal hrt hormones
---

After coming out, my top priority was starting hormone replacement therapy (HRT).

HRT is like second puberty:  there's all kinds of physical changes like breast growth,
hip growth, body hair becomes finer. Receding hairlines can grow back. Changes in fat 
distribution extend to fat in the face, which can make the eyes and cheeks look more 
feminine. HRT can't undo everything bad from first puberty, but it reverses a lot.
The downside is that like first puberty, second puberty takes years. 

There were four ways to get hormones: buy them illegally on the internet,
see a psychologist and get a referral, visit the local HRT clinic, or talk my doctor into prescibing them.
Since the wait at the HRT clinic was 3 months, and I didn't want to destroy my liver, 
the fastest route was to talk to my regular doctor first.

My doctor had no knowledge of HRT when I first talked to her, but she was eager to learn.
I told her I was transgender and I brought a copy of 
[Rainbow Health Ontario's Guidelines](https://www.rainbowhealthontario.ca/TransHealthGuide/gp-femht.html)
which has dosing guidelines and guidance on when and how to start HRT.
The Guidelines require a diagnosis of gender dysphoria, which is conventionally a point where
medical providers can engage in some gatekeeping. I was worried my doctor would a formal diagnosis
by a psychologist, but fortunately she was willing to establish this herself by interviewing me.

While I was nervous about the initial prescription appointment, the real challenge was
the long slog to get to an _effective_ dose of both drugs. In typical conservative medical fashion
we started with a very low dose of a single drug, and every couple weeks I would need to get
blood drawn, set up another appointment, take time off work, etc. and get the dose changed.
Even now after 5 monthly appointments I'm only on 2mg of estradiol, which is the low-end of
the doses required for a real change. 

Besides the slow pace of progress, another downside of visiting a family doctor versus an HRT clinic
is the lack of awareness in trans issues. To their credit, they've got the right name on my medical
file and on my prescriptions. Some of our discussions haven't been ideal: I've heard a story about
another patient at the clinic who's trans but you would "never know". I don't always feel like I'm
getting the best guidance about monitoring my blood levels, about different estrogen options
(shots, patches, pills). I probably need to start getting on the waiting list for surgeries, which
will take a lot of research.

Ultimately working on HRT with my family doctor has been at times frustrating and slow going.
My hope is that my doctor's experience treating me will inform her future practice - 
increasing the supply of experienced, knowledgeable family doctors who can treat trans people.